The following is a list of some of the most commonly researched tasks in natural language processing. Some of these tasks have direct real-world applications, while others more commonly serve as subtasks that are used to aid in solving larger tasks.
Though natural language processing tasks are closely intertwined, they can be subdivided into categories for convenience. A coarse division is given below.
Natural language processing (NLP) is the processing of natural language information by a computer. NLP is a subfield of computer science and is closely associated with artificial intelligence. NLP is also related to information retrieval, knowledge representation, computational linguistics, and linguistics more broadly.
Major processing tasks in an NLP system include: speech recognition, text classification, natural language understanding, and natural language generation.
Natural language processing has its roots in the 1950s. Already in 1950, Alan Turing published an article titled "Computing Machinery and Intelligence" which proposed what is now called the Turing test as a criterion of intelligence, though at the time that was not articulated as a problem separate from artificial intelligence. The proposed test includes a task that involves the automated interpretation and generation of natural language.
Natural language processing (NLP) is technology that allows computers to interpret, manipulate, and comprehend human language. Organizations today have large volumes of voice and text data from various communication channels like emails, text messages, social media newsfeeds, video, audio, and more. Natural language processing is key in analyzing this data for actionable business insights. Organizations can classify, sort, filter, and understand the intent or sentiment hidden in language data. Natural language processing is a key feature of AI-powered automation and supports real-time machine-human communication.
Natural language processing is integrated in almost all modern automation workflows that relate to human communication. Every chatbot you interact with is powered by natural language processing, as are most AI tools. As the world generates more unstructured text and voice data than ever before, NLP allows businesses to turn communication into a competitive advantage.
NLP originated in the 1950s, when researchers first experimented with machine translation. One of the earliest milestones was the Georgetown-IBM experiment in 1954, which automatically translated 60 Russian sentences into English.
Generative AI technology marked a major breakthrough in natural language processing. Software could now respond creatively, moving beyond processing to natural language generation. AI agents with NLP capabilities can summarize meetings, draft emails, and translate conversations in real-time.
NLP technologies gained popularity in the 1990s and early 2000s with applications like spam filtering, document classification, and basic chatbots. However, the turning point came in the 2010s with the rise of deep learning models. They used neural network architecture to analyze data sequences, making it possible to analyze larger blocks of text. Organizations could use NLP to unlock insights buried in emails, customer feedback, support tickets, and social media posts.
NLP technologies allow chat and voice bots to be more human-like when conversing with customers. Businesses use chatbots to scale customer service capability and quality while keeping operational costs to a minimum. PubNub, which builds chatbot software, uses Amazon Comprehend to introduce localized chat functionality for its global customers. T-Mobile uses NLP to identify specific keywords in customers' text messages and offer personalized recommendations. Oklahoma State University deploys a Q&A chatbot solution to address student questions using machine learning technology.
Businesses in the insurance, legal, and healthcare sectors process, sort, and retrieve large volumes of sensitive documents like medical records, financial data, and private data. Instead of reviewing manually, companies use NLP technology to redact personally identifiable information and protect sensitive data. For example, Chisel AI helps insurance carriers extract policy numbers, expiration dates, and other personal customer attributes from unstructured documents with Amazon Comprehend.
Companies use natural language processing for several automated tasks, such as:
Process, analyze, and archive large documents.
Analyze customer feedback or call center recordings
Run chatbots for automated customer service
Answer who-what-when-where questions
Classify and extract text
Businesses use natural language processing (NLP) software and tools to simplify, automate, and streamline operations efficiently and accurately. We give some example use cases below.
